---
doctest: -PY2
---

# Dask Scheduler Resources

Clear existing runs for our tests.

    >>> quiet("guild runs rm -y")

We use a dynamically generated project for these tests.

    >>> project = mkdtemp()

    >>> cd(project)

    >>> write(path(project, "op.py"), """
    ... import os
    ... import time
    ...
    ... sleep = 1.0
    ... _run_id = os.getenv("RUN_ID")
    ... _cuda_devices = os.getenv("CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES")
    ... _gpus_desc = " (CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=%s)" % _cuda_devices if _cuda_devices else ""
    ...
    ... print("Run %s start%s" % (_run_id, _gpus_desc))
    ... time.sleep(sleep)
    ... print("Run %s stop" % _run_id)
    ... """)

## Overview

Resources are used to limit runs to clusters that have available
resources. A resource identified by a name. When specified, resources
have numeric values that indicate available or required
resources. When specified for a cluster, the value indicates the
available named resource for the cluster. When specified for a run,
the value indicates the required named resoure.

Available resources are specified for clusters using the `resources`
flag.

Required resources are specified for a run using a tag in the format
`dask:<resources>`.

## Limited Foo

Let's illustrate by staging two runs, each requiring 5 'foo'
resources (resource names are arbitrary).

    >>> quiet("guild run op.py sleep=2 --tag dask:foo=5 --stage -y")
    >>> quiet("guild run op.py sleep=2 --tag dask:foo=5 --stage -y")

    >>> run("guild runs")
    [1:...]  op.py  ...  staged  dask:foo=5 sleep=2
    [2:...]  op.py  ...  staged  dask:foo=5 sleep=2
    <exit 0>

Run the staged operations using a scheduler with 7 avaialble foo
resources. Because there isn't enough foo to run both operations
concurrently, each is run in series.

    >>> run("guild run dask:scheduler run-once=yes resources=foo=7 -y")
    INFO: [guild] ... Starting Dask scheduler
    INFO: [guild] ... Initializing Dask cluster
    INFO: [guild] ... Dashboard link: ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Cluster resources: foo=7
    INFO: [guild] ... Processing staged runs
    ...
    Run ... start...
    Run ... stop...
    Run ... start...
    Run ... stop...
    INFO: [guild] ... Dask scheduler processed 2 run(s) in ... seconds
    INFO: [guild] ... Stopping Dask scheduler
    INFO: [guild] ... Stopping Dask cluster
    <exit 0>

Let's rerun this scenario with a scheduler that has enough foo to run
two staged runs concurrently.

Stage two runs, each requiring 5 foo, as before.

    >>> quiet("guild run op.py sleep=2 --tag dask:foo=5 --stage -y")
    >>> quiet("guild run op.py sleep=2 --tag dask:foo=5 --stage -y")

This time, start a scheduler with 12 available foo.

    >>> run("guild run dask:scheduler run-once=yes resources=foo=12 -y")
    INFO: [guild] ... Starting Dask scheduler
    INFO: [guild] ... Initializing Dask cluster
    INFO: [guild] ... Dashboard link: ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Cluster resources: foo=12
    INFO: [guild] ... Processing staged runs
    ...
    Run ... start...
    Run ... start...
    Run ... stop...
    Run ... stop...
    INFO: [guild] ... Dask scheduler processed 2 run(s) in ... seconds
    INFO: [guild] ... Stopping Dask scheduler
    INFO: [guild] ... Stopping Dask cluster
    <exit 0>

## Missing Resources

If a run is staged with a required Dask resource that is not
explicitly provided by a scheduler, the scheduler will ignore the
staged run. It cannot run it.

Stage a run with a foo requirement.

    >>> quiet("guild run op.py --tag dask:foo=5 --stage -y")

Run a scheduler without defining available foo.

    >>> run("guild run dask:scheduler run-once=yes -y")
    INFO: [guild] ... Starting Dask scheduler
    ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Processing staged runs
    INFO: [guild] ... Ignorning staged run ... (requires resources not defined for cluster: foo)
    ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Stopping Dask cluster
    <exit 0>

Clear out runs for subsequent tests.

    >>> quiet("guild runs rm -y")

## Multiple Resources

More than one resource can be specified using additional
space-delimited name value pairs. Runs may use multiple tags as well.

Stage a run requiring three resources.

    >>> quiet("guild run op.py -t dask:foo=1 -t 'dask:bar=1 baz=1' --stage -y")

    >>> run("guild runs")
    [1:...]  op.py  ...  staged  dask:foo=1 dask:bar=1 baz=1 sleep=1.0
    <exit 0>

Start a scheduler that provides all three resources.

    >>> run("guild run dask:scheduler resources='foo=1 bar=1 baz=2' run-once=yes -y")
    INFO: [guild] ... Starting Dask scheduler
    ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Processing staged runs
    INFO: [guild] ... Scheduling run ... (requires bar=1 baz=1 foo=1)
    INFO: [guild] ... Run ... started...
    INFO: [guild] ... Run ... completed...
    INFO: [guild] ... Dask scheduler processed 1 run(s) in ... seconds
    INFO: [guild] ... Stopping Dask scheduler
    INFO: [guild] ... Stopping Dask cluster
    <exit 0>

Run the same scenario for with a scheduler with some missing resources.

    >>> quiet("guild run op.py -t dask:foo=1 -t 'dask:bar=1 baz=1' --stage -y")

    >>> run("guild run dask:scheduler resources='foo=1' run-once=yes -y")
    INFO: [guild] ... Starting Dask scheduler
    ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Ignorning staged run ... (requires resources not defined for cluster: bar, baz)
    ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Stopping Dask cluster
    <exit 0>

Delete runs for subsequent tests.

    >>> quiet("guild runs rm -y")

## Misspecified Resources

Dask resources must be in the format `<name>=<value>`. If they aren't
the scheduler logs a warning message and ignores the resource spec.

    >>> run("guild run dask:scheduler resources=foo run-once=yes -y")
    INFO: [guild] ... Starting Dask scheduler
    WARNING: [guild] ... Ignoring invalid dask resources spec 'foo': parts must be in format KEY=VAL
    INFO: [guild] ... Initializing Dask cluster
    ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Stopping Dask cluster
    <exit 0>

Similarly, the scheduler logs a warning and ignores invalid run resources.

    >>> quiet("guild run op.py --stage --tag dask:bar -y")

    >>> run("guild run dask:scheduler run-once=yes -y")
    INFO: [guild] ... Starting Dask scheduler
    ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Processing staged runs
    WARNING: [guild] ... Ignoring invalid dask resources spec 'bar': parts must be in format KEY=VAL
    INFO: [guild] ... Scheduling run ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Run ... started
    Run ... start
    Run ... stop
    INFO: [guild] ... Run ... completed
    ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Stopping Dask cluster
    <exit 0>

Delete runs for subsequent tests.

    >>> quiet("guild runs rm -y")

## GPU Scheduling

A Dask scheduler can be used to limit operations to running in series
on GPUs.

- Start a scheduler with resources for each GPU. The numeric value
  should be either the maximium number of runs for each GPU or the
  total GPU memory.

- Stage runs using the `--gpus` option and a tag that specifies the
  required GPU resource. If the scheduler resource is the number of
  concurrent runs, use the value 1 with the applicable GPU name. If
  the scheduler resource is the GPU memory, specify the amount of
  memory required by the operation on the applicable GPU.

For these tests with use the resource identifiers 'gpu0' and 'gpu1' to
identify each GPU resource.

Stage two runs on GPU 0. These should run in series.

    >>> quiet("guild run op.py --run-id=aaa sleep=2 --gpus 0 --tag dask:gpu0=1 --stage -y")
    >>> quiet("guild run op.py --run-id=bbb sleep=2 --gpus 0 --tag dask:gpu0=1 --stage -y")

Stage a run that requires both GPUs. This run should run only after
the two previous runs finish.

    >>> quiet("guild run op.py --run-id=ccc sleep=2 --gpus 0,1 --tag dask:'gpu0=1 gpu1=1' --stage -y")

Stage a run that requires GPU 1. This should run in parallel alongside
the first staged run for GPU 0. (We increase the sleep time to assert
completion order below.)

    >>> quiet("guild run op.py --run-id=ddd sleep=3 --gpus 1 --tag dask:gpu1=1 --stage -y")

Here are the staged runs:

    >>> run("guild runs")
    [1:ddd]  op.py  ...  staged  dask:gpu1=1 sleep=3
    [2:ccc]  op.py  ...  staged  dask:gpu0=1 gpu1=1 sleep=2
    [3:bbb]  op.py  ...  staged  dask:gpu0=1 sleep=2
    [4:aaa]  op.py  ...  staged  dask:gpu0=1 sleep=2
    <exit 0>

Run a scheduler that defines resources for the two GPUs. It allows
only one run per GPU at a time.

    >>> run("guild run dask:scheduler resources='gpu0=1 gpu1=1' run-once=yes -y")
    INFO: [guild] ... Starting Dask scheduler
    INFO: [guild] ... Initializing Dask cluster
    INFO: [guild] ... Dashboard link: ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Cluster resources: gpu0=1 gpu1=1
    INFO: [guild] ... Processing staged runs
    ...
    INFO: [guild] ... Run aaa started...
    INFO: [guild] ... Run ddd started...
    INFO: [guild] ... Run aaa completed...
    INFO: [guild] ... Run ddd completed...
    INFO: [guild] ... Run ccc started...
    INFO: [guild] ... Run ccc completed...
    INFO: [guild] ... Run bbb started...
    INFO: [guild] ... Run bbb completed...
    INFO: [guild] ... Dask scheduler processed 4 run(s) in ... seconds
    INFO: [guild] ... Stopping Dask scheduler
    INFO: [guild] ... Stopping Dask cluster
    <exit 0>

NOTE: it's surprising that 'ccc' is started before 'bbb'. It's not
clear why Dask is making this decision but is consistent. Importantly,
runs 'aaa' and 'ddd' are scheduled to run alongside one another.
